<text>
Text Encoding:
I chose to mark up “The Yellow Wallpaper” by Charlotte Perkins Gilman.
I have loved this novel since high school, but it has never had the chance to interact with my studies as I am a mechanical engineering major and am mostly focused on math and science.
I have also never had the chance to look in depth at what is happening in the text as I did for this assignment.
The markup criteria I chose were the emotions the narrator/main character exhibited throughout the story as well as what the wallpaper did throughout the text.
The narrator’s emotions are a key part of the story as they are the focal point of the text itself.
The story is about a woman suffering from post-partum depression and her descent into madness via the wallpaper in her bedroom, so I chose to focus on the two main parts of the story: the woman and the wallpaper.
I documented each emotion she had (at least the ones I could distinctly pinpoint) and discovered quite a lot about what truly happens in the story.
I kept track of the wallpaper any time it was mentioned whether it was appearance, a pattern, or later when the narrator starts to see figures in the paper.
She also notices smells and textures in the wallpaper that I mark up in the text as different types of code so as not to confuse the computer.
I also highlighted words I did not understand or thought the general reader would not understand.

I learned quite a lot from the process of marking up this text.
The first time I read this novel I had a hard time grasping what was going on and why the narrator was acting the way she was.
I think even rereading it years later it was a bit of a struggle to comprehend exactly what Gilman’s vision was, but this assignment has taught me a lot.
Mapping out the narrator’s emotions was one of the key parts in understanding her actions and thoughts throughout the novel.
Her transition from emotions like anger and frustration in the beginning to something crazed and insane in the end is not only harrowing but understandable when given the context.
She lacks any happy or joyful emotions by the end and yet seems her happiest in her hysterical, manic state of being the woman in the wallpaper.
It is creepy and yet sad that someone should have to endure this and that so many women did have to endure this whilst being undermined by their husbands and doctors.
The wallpaper is fascinating too when examined as well. The narrator starts by just focusing on the basic appearance, basic patterns and colors of the paper in her bedroom.
As the story progresses, the patterns become eyes that watch her with a “foul” yellow.
She describes the paper having fungus in the orange of the coloring and the scent following her around the house.
The eyes then turn to heads that are trapped behind the “bars” of the pattern, the same bars that keep the woman locked inside the paper.
When you look at the transitions in the paper and what she thinks is happening whilst hyper fixated, the plot makes more sense, and the climax is a lot more obvious.
Overall, I think it’s a wonderful piece that should be analyzed a lot more because this assignment has taught me a lot about it already.
</text>
